rework the “reconciliation” section (#598)
ietf-rats-wg/draft-ietf-rats-corim: draft-ietf-rats-corim.md

Attesters vary across vendors and even across products from a single vendor.
Not only Attesters can evolve and therefore new measurement types need to be expressed, but an Endorser may also want to provide new security relevant attributes about an Attester at a future point in time.

In order to promote interoperability, consistency and accuracy in the representation of Endorsements and Reference Values this document specifies a data model for Endorsements and Reference Values known as Concise Reference Integrity Manifests (CoRIM).
The CoRIM data model is expressed in CDDL which is used to realize a CBOR {{-cbor}} encoding suitable for cryptographic operations (e.g., hashing, signing, encryption) and transmission over computer networks.
Additionally, this document describes multiple phases of a Verifier Appraisal and provides an example of a possible use of CoRIM messages from multiple supply chain actors to represent a homogeneous representation of Attester state.

> CoRIM is extensible to accommodate supply chain diversity while supporting a common representation for Endorsement and Reference Value inputs to Verifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CoRIM is extensible to accommodate supply chain diversity while supporting a common representation for Endorsement and Reference Value inputs to Verifiers.
In essence, the goal of CoRIMs is to describe Attesters to Verifiers.
```

This document is divided into two parts.
The core data model is described in {{sec-corim}}, {{sec-comid}} and {{sec-cotl}}.

> These sections describe the primary CoRIM structures, the Concise Module Identifier (CoMID), which is used to express endorsements and reference values, as well as the Concise Tag Lists (CoTL), which express the currently active sources of endorsements and reference values.

Reviewer: `currently active sources` maybe someone can find a better phrasing here? Hard to parse for me.

> {{sec-reference-verifier}} outlines the architecture of a reference Verifier, detailing the logical phases of Evidence appraisal and explaining how the CoRIM processor validates and augments data according to the "reconciliation" principles set out in {{sec-verifier-rec}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{sec-reference-verifier}} outlines the architecture of a reference Verifier, detailing the logical phases of Evidence appraisal and explaining how the CoRIM processor validates and augments data according to the "reconciliation" principles set out in {{sec-verifier-rec}} to produce corroborated Evidence.
```

Author: Actually, to produce an ACS, no?

Attesters vary across vendors and even across products from a single vendor.
Not only Attesters can evolve and therefore new measurement types need to be expressed, but an Endorser may also want to provide new security relevant attributes about an Attester at a future point in time.

In order to promote interoperability, consistency and accuracy in the representation of Endorsements and Reference Values this document specifies a data model for Endorsements and Reference Values known as Concise Reference Integrity Manifests (CoRIM).
The CoRIM data model is expressed in CDDL which is used to realize a CBOR {{-cbor}} encoding suitable for cryptographic operations (e.g., hashing, signing, encryption) and transmission over computer networks.
Additionally, this document describes multiple phases of a Verifier Appraisal and provides an example of a possible use of CoRIM messages from multiple supply chain actors to represent a homogeneous representation of Attester state.
CoRIM is extensible to accommodate supply chain diversity while supporting a common representation for Endorsement and Reference Value inputs to Verifiers.

> In essence, the goal of CoRIMs is to describe Attesters to Verifiers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In essence, the goal of a CoRIM is to describe expected Attester state to Verifiers.
```

This document is divided into two parts.
The core data model is described in {{sec-corim}}, {{sec-comid}} and {{sec-cotl}}.
These sections describe the primary CoRIM structures, the Concise Module Identifier (CoMID), which is used to express Endorsements and Reference Values, as well as the Concise Tag Lists (CoTL), which express the currently active sources of Endorsements and Reference Values.

> {{sec-reference-verifier}} outlines the architecture of a reference Verifier, detailing the logical phases of Evidence appraisal and explaining how the CoRIM processor validates and augments data according to the "reconciliation" principles set out in {{sec-verifier-rec}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{sec-reference-verifier}} outlines the architecture of a reference Verifier.
The architecture details four phases of the appraisal process that explain how CoRIM inputs are validated, evaluated relative to Evidence, and ultimately accepted as additional expressions of Attester state data.
The four phases of appraisal are called "reconciliation", which applies principles described in {{sec-verifier-rec}}.
```

Additionally, this document describes multiple phases of a Verifier Appraisal and provides an example of a possible use of CoRIM messages from multiple supply chain actors to represent a homogeneous representation of Attester state.
CoRIM is extensible to accommodate supply chain diversity while supporting a common representation for Endorsement and Reference Value inputs to Verifiers.
In essence, the goal of a CoRIM is to describe expected Attester state to Verifiers.

This document is divided into two parts.
The core data model is described in {{sec-corim}}, {{sec-comid}} and {{sec-cotl}}.
These sections describe the primary CoRIM structures, the Concise Module Identifier (CoMID), which is used to express Endorsements and Reference Values, as well as the Concise Tag Lists (CoTL), which express the currently active sources of Endorsements and Reference Values.
{{sec-reference-verifier}} outlines the architecture of a reference Verifier.
The architecture details four phases of the appraisal process that explain how CoRIM inputs are validated, evaluated relative to Evidence, and ultimately accepted as additional expressions of Attester state data.

> The four phases of appraisal are called "reconciliation", which applies principles described in {{sec-verifier-rec}}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, this document also covers how CoRIMs are used within the reference Verifier. Refer to {#sec-verifier-rec}
```

CoRIM triples typically represent assertions made by the CoRIM author regarding Attesting or Target Environments and their security features, such as Measurements and cryptographic key material.
See also Section 3.1 of {{?W3C.rdf11-primer}}.

# How the Verifier Uses CoRIM: The Reconciliation Process {#sec-verifier-rec}

> When a Verifier receives Evidence from a device and a CoRIM from a manufacturer, it has to make sense of it all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a Verifier receives Evidence from an Attester and a CoRIM containing Reference Values, it has to compare Evidence with Reference Values to validate the state of the Attester. This validation process is called corroboration.
```

Reviewer: I thought about proposing Attester, too. But deleted the suggested change and here is why: The term device and manufacturer are used deliberately here, I think. Not the RATS roles. Additionally, the usage of device instead of Attester is pretty common throughout the document.

While I at first had the same impulse as you, Ned, I now think that a simpler text here at the start is better.

> The specification calls this process "Verifier reconciliation".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Verifier reconciliation
```

Reviewer: I am a little bit confused by this suggestion. Is this now a title? Before it was just a sentence in the middle of the paragraph.

Reviewer: Oh... the text below. I see.

> As these inputs arrive in different formats from different sources, the Verifier translates them all into a single, consistent internal representation format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 is a process for coordinating Verifier inputs that may arrive in different formats and from different sources.
 The Verifier translates them into a common internal representation to ensure the reconciliation process is internally consistent.
```

Reviewer: This violates the one sentence per line rule. That is what got me off-track. We can heal that later.
Looks okay.

The Evidence appraisal process can be thought of as a conversation mediated by the Verifier.
The Verifier needs to keep a strict record of exactly what is being claimed and, crucially, who is making the claim (known as the "authority").

> To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS) that only includes corroborated Evidence (the Evidence it could make sense of because it matches some allowed state) and applicable Endorsements.
```

Reviewer 2: Line 275 should be moved just before this line and the parenthetical removed.

## Resolving Conflicts with the ACS

Multiple parties contribute to the "conversation" about a device's trustworthiness: the device itself (the Attester), the manufacturer (the CoRIM issuer), and potentially the organization relying on the device (the Verifier Owner).

Sometimes, these parties contradict each other.

> For instance, a compromised device might lie about the software it's running, conflicting with the manufacturer's authorized measurements.

Reviewer: Hm... not sure that is the best example. Wouldn't a compromized device try to appear healthy? I assume the "compromization" is RATS-unaware in this scenario.

Reviewer 2: +1

> For instance, a compromised device might lie about the software it's running, conflicting with the manufacturer's authorized measurements.

Author: ```suggestion
For instance, an outdated or compromised device may report software measurements that conflict with those authorized by the manufacturer.
```

> The Verifier uses the ACS to map out the true, presumed actual state of the device by cross-referencing these inputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Verifier uses the ACS to determine the actual state of the Attester, as defined by the various entities providing inputs.
```

> Different RATS Conceptual Messages interact to build the final ACS:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Verifier inputs are called Conceptual Messages that make up the set of Claims used to build the ACS:
```

Author: This doesn’t look like an improvement over L291

| Input Type | Source | How the Verifier Updates the ACS |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Evidence** | The Device | If the device proves its identity, its claims are added to the ACS and tagged with the device's authority. |
| **Reference Values** | CoRIM | The Verifier checks the Reference Values in the CoRIM against the ACS. If a value matches a claim the device just made, that claim gets an extra tag noting the manufacturer agrees with it. |
| **Endorsements** | CoRIM | If the device's claims meet certain expectations in the ACS, the Verifier adds new, broader claims (Endorsed Values) to the ACS, tagged with the manufacturer's authority. |
{: #tbl-cmrr title="Conceptual Message Representation Requirements"}

> *Note: If the device's Evidence is never matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Note: If the Attester's Evidence is not matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*
```

> ## Applying the Policy

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Applying the Appraisal Policy of Evidence
```

> ## Applying the Policy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Applying Appraisal Policy for Evidence
```

CoRIM triples typically represent assertions made by the CoRIM author regarding Attesting or Target Environments and their security features, such as Measurements and cryptographic key material.
See also Section 3.1 of {{?W3C.rdf11-primer}}.

> # How the Verifier Uses CoRIM: The Reconciliation Process {#sec-verifier-rec}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# How the Verifier Uses CoRIM: The Reconciliation Principles {#sec-verifier-rec}
```

> When a Verifier receives Evidence from a device and a CoRIM from a manufacturer, it has to make sense of it all.

Author: ```suggestion
When a Verifier receives Evidence from an Attester and a CoRIM containing Reference Values and Endorsements from a manufacturer, it has to make sense of it all.
```

The specification calls this process "Verifier reconciliation".
As these inputs arrive in different formats from different sources, the Verifier translates them all into a single, consistent internal representation format.

The Evidence appraisal process can be thought of as a conversation mediated by the Verifier.

> The Verifier needs to keep a strict record of exactly what is being claimed and, crucially, who is making the claim (known as the "authority").

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Verifier keeps a strict record of exactly what is being claimed in the various Conceptual Message inputs and, crucially, who is making the claims (known as the "authority").
Authority determines which entity asserts which Claims about an Attester.
Conceptually, the various entities are having a conversation about the Attester, which the Verifier records.
```

Reviewer: wordsmithed

> To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad of Attester state called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS).
```

Different RATS conceptual messages contribute to the construction of an ACS following the requirements in {{tbl-cmrr}}.

| Input Type | Source | How the Verifier Updates the ACS |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Evidence** | The Device | If the device proves its identity, its claims are added to the ACS and tagged with the device's authority. |
| **Reference Values** | CoRIM | The Verifier checks the Reference Values in the CoRIM against the ACS. If a value matches a claim the device just made, that claim gets an extra tag noting the manufacturer agrees with it. |
| **Endorsements** | CoRIM | If the device's claims meet certain expectations in the ACS, the Verifier adds new, broader claims (Endorsed Values) to the ACS, tagged with the manufacturer's authority. |
{: #tbl-cmrr title="Conceptual Message Representation Requirements"}

*Note: If the Attester's Evidence is not matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*

## Consistency of ACS

To ensure everyone builds these systems consistently, the specification uses CDDL to define both the exact structure of the CoRIM and a theoretical data model for the ACS.

> However, the exact way a Verifier's software is coded to store this internal representation is up to the developer, so long as it strictly follows the reconciliation rules outlined above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, the exact way a Verifier's software is implemented to realize the internal representation is up to the implementor.
```

{{sec-corim-processor}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the ACS is built and the conversation is consistent, the ACS is available for processing of subsequent phases.
```

> ## Applying the Appraisal Policy of Evidence

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Once the ACS is built and the conversation is reconciled, the Verifier consults its Appraisal Policy.

The policy dictates what the final Attestation Result should be based on the facts in the ACS.

> For example, a policy might state that an assertion is only valid if it is explicitly backed by a specific manufacturer's Reference Value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> If everything looks correct, the policy can even instruct the Verifier to generate entirely new conclusions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> For instance, if all individual components in a subsystem check out, the Verifier might generate a final, definitive claim stating `"TRUSTED = TRUE"`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

CoRIM triples typically represent assertions made by the CoRIM author regarding Attesting or Target Environments and their security features, such as Measurements and cryptographic key material.
See also Section 3.1 of {{?W3C.rdf11-primer}}.

# Use of CoRIM in a Verifier {#sec-verifier-rec}

The Evidence appraisal process can be thought of as a conversation mediated by the Verifier.
The Verifier keeps a strict record of exactly what is being claimed in the various Conceptual Message inputs and, crucially, who is making the claims (known as the "authority").
Authority determines which entity asserts which Claims about an Attester.
Conceptually, the various entities are having a conversation about the Attester, which the Verifier records.

> To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad of Attester state called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad of Attester state called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS).

The motivation for describing a reference CoRIM Verifier is for consistent Verifier operation across the ecosystem.
```

CoRIM triples typically represent assertions made by the CoRIM author regarding Attesting or Target Environments and their security features, such as Measurements and cryptographic key material.
See also Section 3.1 of {{?W3C.rdf11-primer}}.

# Use of CoRIM in a Verifier {#sec-verifier-rec}

The Evidence appraisal process can be thought of as a conversation mediated by the Verifier.
The Verifier keeps a strict record of exactly what is being claimed in the various Conceptual Message inputs and, crucially, who is making the claims (known as the "authority").
Authority determines which entity asserts which Claims about an Attester.
Conceptually, the various entities are having a conversation about the Attester, which the Verifier records.
To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad of Attester state called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS).

> ## Resolving Conflicts with the ACS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Interactions with ACS
```

Multiple parties contribute to the "conversation" about a device's trustworthiness: the device itself (the Attester), the manufacturer (the CoRIM issuer), and potentially the organization relying on the device (the Verifier Owner).

Sometimes, these parties may contradict each other.

> For instance, an outdated or compromised device may report software measurements that conflict with those authorized by the manufacturer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

The Verifier uses the ACS to determine the actual state of the Attester, as defined by the various entities providing inputs.

> Different RATS Conceptual Messages interact to build the final ACS:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Different RATS conceptual messages contribute to the construction of an ACS following the requirements in {{tbl-cmrr}}.
```

| Input Type | Source | How the Verifier Updates the ACS |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Evidence** | The Device | If the device proves its identity, its claims are added to the ACS and tagged with the device's authority. |
| **Reference Values** | CoRIM | The Verifier checks the Reference Values in the CoRIM against the ACS. If a value matches a claim the device just made, that claim gets an extra tag noting the manufacturer agrees with it. |
| **Endorsements** | CoRIM | If the device's claims meet certain expectations in the ACS, the Verifier adds new, broader claims (Endorsed Values) to the ACS, tagged with the manufacturer's authority. |
{: #tbl-cmrr title="Conceptual Message Representation Requirements"}

> *Note: If the Attester's Evidence is not matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Note: If the Attester's Evidence is not matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*

## Consistency of ACS

To ensure everyone builds these systems consistently, the specification uses CDDL to define both the exact structure of the CoRIM and a theoretical data model for the ACS.
However, the exact way a Verifier's software is coded to store this internal representation is up to the developer, so long as it strictly follows the reconciliation rules outlined above.
{{sec-corim-processor}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail.
```

## Applying the Appraisal Policy of Evidence

Once the ACS is built and the conversation is reconciled, the Verifier consults its Appraisal Policy.

The policy dictates what the final Attestation Result should be based on the facts in the ACS.
For example, a policy might state that an assertion is only valid if it is explicitly backed by a specific manufacturer's Reference Value.

If everything looks correct, the policy can even instruct the Verifier to generate entirely new conclusions.
For instance, if all individual components in a subsystem check out, the Verifier might generate a final, definitive claim stating `"TRUSTED = TRUE"`.

## Consistency of ACS

To ensure everyone builds these systems consistently, the specification uses CDDL to define both the exact structure of the CoRIM and a theoretical data model for the ACS.

> However, the exact way a Verifier's software is coded to store this internal representation is up to the developer, so long as it strictly follows the reconciliation rules outlined above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> {{sec-corim-processor}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The specification calls this process "Verifier reconciliation".
As these inputs arrive in different formats from different sources, the Verifier translates them all into a single, consistent internal representation format.

The Evidence appraisal process can be thought of as a conversation mediated by the Verifier.
The Verifier keeps a strict record of exactly what is being claimed in the various Conceptual Message inputs and, crucially, who is making the claims (known as the "authority").
Authority determines which entity asserts which Claims about an Attester.
Conceptually, the various entities are having a conversation about the Attester, which the Verifier records.
To achieve this, the Verifier creates an internal scratchpad of Attester state called the Appraisal Claims Set (ACS).

## Resolving Conflicts with the ACS

Multiple parties contribute to the "conversation" about a device's trustworthiness: the device itself (the Attester), the manufacturer (the CoRIM issuer), and potentially the organization relying on the device (the Verifier Owner).

> Sometimes, these parties contradict each other.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sometimes, these parties may contradict each other.
```

*Note: If the Attester's Evidence is not matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*

## Applying the Appraisal Policy of Evidence

Once the ACS is built and the conversation is reconciled, the Verifier consults its Appraisal Policy.

The policy dictates what the final Attestation Result should be based on the facts in the ACS.
For example, a policy might state that an assertion is only valid if it is explicitly backed by a specific manufacturer's Reference Value.

If everything looks correct, the policy can even instruct the Verifier to generate entirely new conclusions.
For instance, if all individual components in a subsystem check out, the Verifier might generate a final, definitive claim stating `"TRUSTED = TRUE"`.

## Deterministic Results

To ensure everyone builds these systems consistently, the specification uses CDDL to define both the exact structure of the CoRIM and a theoretical data model for the ACS.
However, the exact way a Verifier's software is coded to store this internal representation is up to the developer, so long as it strictly follows the reconciliation rules outlined above.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{sec-corim-processor}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail.
```

Author: > _Section 8 {{{sec-corim-processor}}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail_

Why is this needed again?  The introduction already refers to §8.

> _however the use of Appraisal Policy of Evidence and Deterministic Results are out of scope for this specification._

The “deterministic result” part is not out of scope; it’s one of the core value propositions.

Reviewer 3: > > _Section 8 {{{sec-corim-processor}}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail_
> 
> Why is this needed again? The introduction already refers to §8.
> 
> > _however the use of Appraisal Policy of Evidence and Deterministic Results are out of scope for this specification._
> 
> The “deterministic result” part is not out of scope; it’s one of the core value propositions.

For reference I think, it is important to highlight that this text is an introductory text - for further details refer to Section 8.

For scope thing, it is important to mention that:

Anything from Policy Evaluation down to mapping Attestation Results (introduced here) but not covered well in Section 8, hence is it is out of scope!

Reviewer 3: I see this section as an Intro Read to Section-8 to set the _initial_ context to Section-8.

CoRIM triples typically represent assertions made by the CoRIM author regarding Attesting or Target Environments and their security features, such as Measurements and cryptographic key material.
See also Section 3.1 of {{?W3C.rdf11-primer}}.

> # How the Verifier Uses CoRIM: The Reconciliation Principles {#sec-verifier-rec}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Use of CoRIM in a Verifier {#sec-verifier-rec}
```

> When a Verifier receives Evidence from an Attester and a CoRIM containing Reference Values and Endorsements from a manufacturer, it has to make sense of it all.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> The specification calls this process "Verifier reconciliation".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> As these inputs arrive in different formats from different sources, the Verifier translates them all into a single, consistent internal representation format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

| **Endorsements** | CoRIM | If the device's claims meet certain expectations in the ACS, the Verifier adds new, broader claims (Endorsed Values) to the ACS, tagged with the manufacturer's authority. |
{: #tbl-cmrr title="Conceptual Message Representation Requirements"}

*Note: If the Attester's Evidence is not matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*

## Applying the Appraisal Policy of Evidence

Once the ACS is built and the conversation is reconciled, the Verifier consults its Appraisal Policy.

The policy dictates what the final Attestation Result should be based on the facts in the ACS.
For example, a policy might state that an assertion is only valid if it is explicitly backed by a specific manufacturer's Reference Value.

If everything looks correct, the policy can even instruct the Verifier to generate entirely new conclusions.
For instance, if all individual components in a subsystem check out, the Verifier might generate a final, definitive claim stating `"TRUSTED = TRUE"`.

> ## Deterministic Results

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Consistency of ACS
```

*Note: If the Attester's Evidence is not matched and corroborated by the manufacturer's Reference Values, the manufacturer's claims do not get added to the ACS.*

## Applying the Appraisal Policy of Evidence

Once the ACS is built and the conversation is reconciled, the Verifier consults its Appraisal Policy.

The policy dictates what the final Attestation Result should be based on the facts in the ACS.
For example, a policy might state that an assertion is only valid if it is explicitly backed by a specific manufacturer's Reference Value.

If everything looks correct, the policy can even instruct the Verifier to generate entirely new conclusions.
For instance, if all individual components in a subsystem check out, the Verifier might generate a final, definitive claim stating `"TRUSTED = TRUE"`.

## Deterministic Results

To ensure everyone builds these systems consistently, the specification uses CDDL to define both the exact structure of the CoRIM and a theoretical data model for the ACS.
However, the exact way a Verifier's software is coded to store this internal representation is up to the developer, so long as it strictly follows the reconciliation rules outlined above.

> {{sec-corim-processor}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{sec-corim-processor}} describes these Reconciliation Principles in detail.

```
